A while back, one of my nephews asked me how computers work. During my recent trip, I spent some time with him to answer that question. I will share this introduction in the next few  posts. I will provided more detailed references at the end. Feel free to drop a comment if something needs elaborating.

"How do computers work?" can be answered at many levels, just like "How does life work?". For life, you can explain that there is an ecosystem of plants and animals, the interaction of animals, the physical and behavioral attributes of individuals of a specie, the function of different organs in their body, the cellular structure of each organ, or the atomic structure of different types of cells.

For computers, there is a similar hierarchy of abstractions: ecosystem of computers (networks), individual computers formed of large components (screen, keyboard, proceesor, memory) and software, circuits forming processors and memory, and the atomic-size elements (transistors, wires) forming those circuits.

I will mainly focus on the hardware part, starting from the bottom (transistor, see next post) and building up to a processor by assembling simple and small components into more advanced and larger components. I won't discuss the software part much (maybe later). It is useful if the reader has already done a little bit of software programming (mathematical primitives, conditionals, loops, variables, functions/modules), as the computer we will "build" will implement those instructions. 
I will also assume that the reader is familiar with logic (booleans, AND/OR/NOT operations) and binary representation of numbers (binary/base-2 110 is decimal/base-10 6).

Before laying the first brick, let me give an overview of what we are going to build. The processor is the central component of a computer. At every tick of the clock, it reads an instruction and executes it. In a sense, the processor is like a factory worker, who follows a detailed recipe or script (1- "take a screw from shelf A", 2- "take a part from shelf B", 3- "attach the screw to the part", 4- "put the result in a bin", 5- "call the supervisor if no screws are left", 6- "start over at step 1").
The processor can execute different types of instructions: "read input number from memory A", "add two numbers", "write output number into memory B", and so on. The processor normally follows the instructions in order, but it can be instructed to jump to a different instruction ("jump to instruction X", or "if number is zero, then jump to instruction Y, otherwise proceed to next instruction"). Recipes are called algorithms. You can solve complex problems with a long list of simple instructions, just like you can manufacture a car with workers following small steps.

